Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS)
*****************************

Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) :cite:p:`mckay1979` is one of the most common methods in space-filling experimental designs. With this sampling technique, for :math:`N` uncertain factors, an :math:`N`-dimensional hypercube is generated, with each factor divided into an equal number of levels depending on the total number of samples to be generated. Equal numbers of samples are then randomly generated at each level, across all factors. In this manner, latin hypercube design guarantees sampling from every level of the variability space and without any overlaps. When the number of samples generated is much larger than the number of uncertain factors, LHS can be very effective in examining the effects of each factor :cite:p:`saltelli2008global`. LHS is an attractive technique, because it guarantees a diverse coverage of the space, through the use of subintervals, without being constrained to discrete levels for each factor - compare :numref:`Figure_3_3` (c) with :numref:`Figure_3_3` (d) for the same number of samples.

LHS is less effective when the number of samples is not much larger than the number of uncertain factors, and the effects of each factor cannot be appropriately distinguished. The samples between factors can also be highly correlated, biasing any subsequent sensitivity analysis results. To address this, the sampling scheme can be modified to control for the correlation in parameters while maximizing the information derived. An example of such modification is through the use of orthogonal arrays :cite:p:`tang1993orthogonal`.
