The Critical Final Step: Predictive Checks
##########################################

Every UQ workflow requires a number of choices, potentially including selecting prior distributions, the likelihood specification, and any used numerical models. Checking the appropriateness of these choices is an essential step for sound inferences, as misspecification can produce biased results :cite:p:`brynjarsdottir_learning_2014`. Model checking in this fashion is part of an iterative UQ process, as the results can reveal adjustments to the statistical model or the need to select a different numerical model :cite:p:`gelman_posterior_1996, gelman_bayesian_2020, gelman_philosophy_2013`.

A classic example is the need to check the structure of residuals for correlations. Many standard statistical models, such as linear regression, assume that the residuals are independent and identically distributed from the error distribution. The presence of correlations, including temporal autocorrelations and spatial correlations, indicates a structural mismatch between the likelihood and the data. In these cases, the likelihood should be adjusted to account for these correlations.

Checking residuals in this fashion is one example of a predictive check (or a posterior predictive check in the Bayesian setting). One way to view UQ is as a means to recover data-generating processes (associated with each parameter vector) consistent with the observations. Predictive checks compare the inferred data-generating process to the observations to determine whether the model is capable of appropriately capturing uncertainty. After conducting the UQ analysis, alternatively realized datasets are simulated from sampled parameters. These alternative datasets, or their summary statistics, can be tested against the observations to determine adequacy of the fit. Predictive checks are therefore a way of probing various model components to identify shortcomings that might result in biased inferences or poor projections, depending on the goal of the analysis.

One example of a graphical predictive check for time series models is hindcasting, where predictive intervals are constructed from the alternative datasets and plotted along with the data. Hindcasts demonstrate how well the model is capable of capturing the broader dynamics of the data, as well as whether the parameter distributions produce appropriate levels of output uncertainty. A related quantitative check is the surprise index, which calculates the percentage of data points located within a fixed predictive interval. For example, the 90% predictive interval should contain approximately 90% of the data. More uncertainty than this reflects underconfidence, while less uncertainty reflects overconfidence. This could be the result of priors that are not appropriately informative, or a likelihood that does not account for correlations between data points appropriately. It could also be the result of a numerical model that isn’t sufficiently sensitive to the parameters that are treated as uncertain.
