Key Take-Home Points
####################

When appropriate, UQ is an important component of the exploratory modeling workflow. While a number of parameter sets could be consistent with observations, they may result in divergent model outputs when exposed to different future conditions. This can result in identifying risks which are not visible when selecting a “best fit” parameterization. Quantifying uncertainties also allows us to quantify the support for hypotheses, which is an essential part of the scientific process.

Due to the scale and complexity of the experiments taking place in IM3, UQ has not been extensively used. The tradeoff between the available number of function evaluations and the number of uncertain parameters illustrated in :numref:`Figure_A1_1` is particularly challenging due to the increasing complexity of state-of-the-art models and the movement towards coupled, multisector models. This tradeoff can be addressed somewhat through the use of emulators and parallelizable methods. In particular, when attempting to navigate this tradeoff by limiting the number of uncertain parameters, it is important to carefully iterate with sensitivity analyses to ensure that critical parameters are identified.

Specifying prior distributions and likelihoods is an ongoing challenge. Prior distributions, in particular, should be treated as deeply uncertain when appropriate. One key advantage of the methods described in this chapter is that they have the potential for increased transparency. When it is not possible to conduct a sensitivity analysis on a number of critical priors due to limited computational budgets, fully specifying and providing a justification for the utilized distributions allows other researchers to identify key assumptions and build on existing work. The same is true for the specification of likelihoods---while likelihood-free methods avoid the need to specify a likelihood function, they require other assumptions or choices, which should be described and justified as transparently as possible.

We conclude this appendix with some key recommendations:
1. UQ analysis does not require full confidence in priors and likelihoods. Rather, UQ should be treated as part of an exploratory modeling workflow, where hypotheses related to model structures, prior distributions, and likelihoods can be tested.
2. For complex multisectoral models, UQ will typically require the use of a reduced set of parameters, either through emulation or by fixing the others to their best-fit values. These parameters should be selected through a careful sensitivity analysis.
3. Avoid the use of supposedly “non-informative” priors, such as uniform priors, whenever possible. In the absence of strong information about parameter values, the use of weakly informative priors, such as diffuse normals, is preferable.
4. Be cognizant of the limitations of conclusions that can be drawn by using each method. The bootstrap, for example, may result in overconfidence if the dataset is limited and is not truly representative of the underlying stochastic process.
5. When using MCMC, Markov chains can not be shown to have converged to the target distribution, but rather evidence can be collected to demonstrate that it is likely that they have.
6. Conduct predictive checks based on the assumptions underlying the choices made in the analysis, and iteratively update those choices if the assumptions prove to be ill-suited for the problem at hand.
