Why Perform Sensitivity Analysis
################################

It is important to understand the many ways in which a SA might be of use to your modeling effort which can help shape the framing of model-informed study. Most commonly, one might be motivated to perform sensitivity analysis for the following reasons, grouped into two major categories, Model Evaluation and Fidelity Testing, and Exploratory Modeling and Scenario Discovery.

*Model evaluation*: Sensitivity analysis can be used to gauge model inferences when assumptions about the structure of the model or its parameterization are dubious or have changed. For instance, consider a numerical model that uses a set of calibrated parameter values to produce outputs, which we then use to inform decisions about the real-world system represented. One might like to know if small changes in these parameter values significantly change this model’s output and the decisions it informs or if, instead, our parameter inferences yield stable model behavior regardless of the uncertainty present in the specific parameterized processes or properties. This can either discredit or lend credence to the model at hand, as well as any inferences drawn that are founded on its accurate representation of the system. Sensitivity analysis can identify which uncertain model factors cause this undesirable model behavior.

*Model simplification*: Sensitivity analysis can also be used to identify factors or components of the model that appear to have limited effects on direct outputs or metrics of interest. Consider a model that has been developed in an organization for the purposes of a specific research question and is later used in the context of a different application. Some processes represented in significant detail might no longer be of the same importance while consuming significant data or computational resources, as different outputs might be pertinent to the new application. Sensitivity analysis can be used to identify unimportant model components and simplify them to nominal values and reduced model forms. Model complexity and computational costs can therefore be reduced, and, by extension, monetary investments. 

*Model refinement*: Alternatively, sensitivity analysis can reveal the factors or processes that are highly influential to the outputs or metrics of interest, by assessing their relative importance. In the context of model evaluation, this can inform which model components warrant additional investigation or measurement so the uncertainty surrounding them and the resulting model outputs or metrics of interest can be reduced.

*Exploratory modeling*: When sufficient credence has been established in the model, sensitivity analysis can be applied to a host of other inquiries. Inferences about the factors and processes that most (or least) control a model’s outputs of interest can be extrapolated to the real system they represent and be used in a heuristic manner to inform model-based inferences. On this foundation, a model paired with the advanced techniques presented in this text can be used to “discover” decision relevant and highly consequential outcomes (i.e., scenario discovery,  :cite:p`bankes_exploratory_1993, bryant2010thinking`).
