Regional Sensitivity Analysis
*****************************
Another method primarily applied for basic factor mapping applications is Regional Sensitivity Analysis (RSA; :cite:p:`hornberger1981approach`). RSA is a global sensitivity analysis method that is typically implemented using standard sampling methods such as latin hypercube sampling. It is performed by specifying a condition on the output space (e.g., an upper threshold) and classifying outputs that meet the condition as behavioral and the ones that fail it as non-behavioral (illustrated in :numref:`Figure_3_2` (b)). Note that the specified threshold depends on the nature of the problem, model, and the research question. It can reflect model-performance metrics (such as errors) or consequential decision-relevant metrics (such as unacceptable system outcomes). The behavioral and non-behavioral outputs are then traced back to their originating sampled factors, where differences between the distributions of samples can be used to determine their significance in producing each part of the output. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov divergence is commonly used to quantify the difference between the distribution of behavioral and non-behavioral parameters :cite:p:`pianosi2016sensitivity`:

.. math::
  S_i=|F_{x_i|y_b} (y \in Y_b)-F_{x_i|y_{nb}} (y \in Y_{nb})|

where :math:`Y_b` represents the set of behavioral outputs, and :math:`F_{x_i|y_b}` is the empirical cumulative distribution function of the values of :math:`x_i` associated with values of :math:`y` that belong in the behavioral set. The :math:`nb` notation indicates the equivalent elements related to the non-behavioral set. Large differences between the two distributions indicate stronger effects by the parameters on the respective part of the output space.

Used in a factor mapping setting, RSA can be applied for scenario discovery :cite:p:`lempert2006general,groves2007new`, the Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation method (GLUE; :cite:p:`beven_future_1992,beven2014glue,blasone2008generalized`) and other hybrid sensitivity analysis methods (e.g., :cite:p:`cryer1999regional,wei2013monte`). The fundamental shortcomings of RSA are that, in some cases, it could be hard to interpret the difference between behavioral and non-behavioral sample sets, and that insights about parametric correlations and interactions cannot always be uncovered :cite:p:`saltelli2004sensitivity`. For more elaborate discussions and illustrations of the RSA method, readers are directed to :cite:t:`saltelli2008global,tang2007comparing,young1999data` and references therein.
