Low-Discrepancy Sequences
*************************

Low-discrepancy sequences is another sampling technique that employs a pseudo-random generator for Monte Carlo sampling (Dalal et al., 2008; Zaremba, 1968). These quasi-Monte Carlo methods eliminate potential gaps and clusters between samples by minimizing discrepancy when generating uniformly distributed random samples within the hypercube. The discrepancy property is mathematically measured by characterizing the lumpiness of a sequence of samples in a multidimensional space, which results in evenly distributed samples (Dalal et al., 2008). Discrepancy can be quantitatively measured using the deviations of sampled points from the uniform distribution (Kucherenko et al., 2015). Low-discrepancy sequences ensure that the number of samples in any subspace of the variability hypercube is approximately the same. This is not something guaranteed by LH sampling, and even though the design can be improved through optimization with various criteria, it is limited to small sample sizes and low dimensions (Iooss et al., 2010; Jin et al., 2008; Kucherenko et al., 2015; Morris and Mitchell, 1995; Park, 1994). The Sobol sequence (Sobol, 1976; Sobol’, 1967), one of the most widely used sampling techniques, utilizes the low-discrepancy approach to uniformly fill the sampled factor space. A core advantage of this style of sampling is that it takes far fewer samples (i.e., simulations) to attain a much lower level of error in estimating model output statistics (e.g., the mean and variance of outputs).
