Latin Hypercube (LH) Sampling
*****************************

Latin hypercube sampling (McKay et al., 1979) is one of the most common methods in space-filling experimental designs. With this sampling technique, for N uncertain factors, an N-dimensional hypercube is generated, with each factor divided into an equal number of levels depending on the sample to be generated. Equal numbers of samples are then randomly generated at each level, across all factors. In this manner, LH design guarantees sampling from every level of the variability space and without any overlaps. When the number of samples generated is much larger than the number of uncertain factors, LH sampling can be very effective in examining the effects of each factor (Saltelli et al., 2008). LH sampling is an attractive technique, because it guarantees a diverse coverage of the space, through the use of subintervals, without being constrained to discrete levels for each factor - compare Fig. 6 (c) with Fig. 6 (d) for the same number of samples.

LH sampling is less effective when the number of samples is not much larger than the number of uncertain factors, and the effects of each factor cannot be appropriately distinguished. The samples between factors can also be highly correlated, biasing any subsequent sensitivity analysis results. To address this, the sampling scheme can be modified to control for the correlation in parameters while maximizing the information derived. An example of such modification is through the use of orthogonal arrays (Tang, 1993).
