Regional Sensitivity Analysis
*****************************
Another method primarily applied for basic factor mapping applications is Regional Sensitivity Analysis (RSA; Hornberger and Spear (1981)). RSA is a global sensitivity analysis method that is typically implemented using standard sampling methods such as LH sampling. It is performed by specifying a condition on the output space (e.g., an upper threshold) and classifying outputs that meet the condition as behavioral and the ones that fail it as non-behavioral (illustrated in :numref:`Figure_3_2` b. Note that the specified threshold depends on the nature of the problem, model, and the research question. It can reflect model-performance metrics (such as errors) or consequential decision-relevant metrics (such as unacceptable system outcomes). The behavioral and non-behavioral outputs are then traced back to their originating sampled factor sets, where differences between the distributions of samples can be used to determine their significance in producing each part of the output. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov divergence is commonly used to quantify the difference between the distribution of behavioral and non-behavioral parameters (Pianosi et al., 2016):


.. math::
  S_i=|F_{x_i|y_b}y \in Y_b)-F_{x_i|y_{nb}(y \in Y_{nb})}|

where :math:`Y_b` represents the set of behavioral outputs, and :math:`F_{x_i|y_b}` is the empirical cumulative distribution function of the values of xi associated with values of y that belong in the behavioral set. The nb notation indicates the equivalent elements related to the non-behavioral set. Large differences between the two distributions indicate stronger effects by the parameters on the respective part of the output space. 

Used in a factor mapping setting, RSA can be applied for scenario discovery (Groves and Lempert, 2007; Lempert et al., 2006), the Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation method (GLUE; Beven and Binley (2014, 1992); Blasone et al. (2008)) and other hybrid sensitivity analysis methods (e.g., Cryer and Havens (1999); Wei et al. (2013)). The fundamental shortcomings of RSA are that, in some cases, it could be hard to interpret the difference between behavioral and non-behavioral sample sets, and that insights about parametric correlations and interactions cannot always be uncovered (Saltelli et al., 2004). For more elaborate discussions and illustrations of the RSA method, readers are directed to Saltelli et al. (2008), Tang et al. (2007), Young (1999), and references therein.
